Quality assurance in digital dental radiography--justification and dose reduction
in dental and maxillofacial radiology.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the implementation of quality assurance requirements for
digital dental radiography in routine clinical practice. The results should be
discussed by radiation protection authorities in the context of the relevant
legal requirements and current debates on radiation protection.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Two hundred digital dental radiographs were randomly
selected from the digital database of the Department of Dentistry's Dental and
Maxillofacial Surgery Clinic, Ulm University, and evaluated for various aspects
of image quality and compliance with radiographic documentation requirements. The
dental films were prepared by different radiology assistants (RAs) using one of
two digital intraoral radiographic systems: Sirona Heliodent DS, 60 kV, focal
spot size: 0.7 mm (group A) or KaVo Gendex 765 DC, 65 kV, focal spot size: 0.4 mm
(group B).
RESULTS: Radiographic justification was documented in 70.5% of cases, and the
radiographic findings in 76.5%. Both variables were documented in the patient
records as well as in the software in 14% of cases. Clinical documentation of the
required information (name of the responsible dentist and radiology assistant,
date, patient name, department, tube voltage, tube current, exposure time, type
of radiograph, film size, department and serial number of the dental radiograph) 
was 100% complete in all cases. Moreover, the department certified according to
DIN ISO 9001:2008 specifications demonstrated complete clinical documentation of 
radiographic justifications and radiographic findings. The entire dentition was
visible on 83% of the digital films. The visible area corresponded to the target 
region on 85.7% of the digital dental radiographs. Seven to 8.5% of the images
were classified as "hypometric" or "hypermetric".
CONCLUSIONS: This study indicates that improvements in radiology training and
continuing education fordentists and dental staff performing x-ray examinations
are needed to ensure consistent high quality of digital dental radiography.
Implementation of internal radiological quality assurance programs, as required
by public law in Germany since 2010 (SGB V), would appear prudent.