Lack of security of networked medical equipment in radiology.

OBJECTIVE. There are few articles in the literature describing the security and
safety aspects of networked medical equipment in radiology departments. Most
radiologists are unaware of the security issues. We review the security of the
networked medical equipment of a typical radiology department. MATERIALS AND
METHODS. All networked medical equipment in a radiology department was scanned
for vulnerabilities with a port scanner and a network vulnerability scanner, and 
the vulnerabilities were classified using the Common Vulnerability Scoring
System. A network sniffer was used to capture and analyze traffic on the
radiology network for exposure of confidential patient data. We reviewed the use 
of antivirus software and firewalls on the networked medical equipment. USB ports
and CD and DVD drives in the networked medical equipment were tested to see
whether they allowed unauthorized access. Implementation of the virtual private
network (VPN) that vendors use to access the radiology network was reviewed.
RESULTS. Most of the networked medical equipment in our radiology department used
vulnerable software with open ports and services. Of the 144 items scanned, 64
(44%) had at least one critical vulnerability, and 119 (83%) had at least one
high-risk vulnerability. Most equipment did not encrypt traffic and allowed
capture of confidential patient data. Of the 144 items scanned, two (1%) used
antivirus software and three (2%) had a firewall enabled. The USB ports were not 
secure on 49 of the 58 (84%) items with USB ports, and the CD or DVD drive was
not secure on 17 of the 31 (55%) items with a CD or DVD drive. One of three
vendors had an insecure implementation of VPN access. CONCLUSION. Radiologists
and the medical industry need to urgently review and rectify the security issues 
in existing networked medical equipment. We hope that the results of our study
and this article also raise awareness among radiologists about the security
issues of networked medical equipment.